Class 14 Exercises

Sutta Number: MN39
Pali: so imam’eva kāyaṃ vivekajena pītisukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati
English Translation: He causes this very body to overflow, to flow around, to fill up all around, to suffuse with the joy and happiness born from separation [from the hindrances].

Sutta Number: DN23.20
Pali: atha kho pāyāsi rājañño uttaraṃ māṇavaṃ āmantāpetvā etad’avoca
English Translation: And then, having had summoned a young brahmin Uttara, Payasi, the young nobleman, said this.

Sutta Number: AN2.19
Pali: kusalaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvetha. sakkā, bhikkhave, kusalaṃ bhāvetuṃ
English Translation: You should develop wholesome qualities. It is possible to develop wholesome qualities.

Sutta Number: DN14.4
Pali: atha kho, bhikkhave, bandhumā rājā vipassissa kumārassa tayo pāsāde kārāpesi
English Translation: And then, monks, King Bandhuma had three palaces built for prince Vipassi.

Sutta Number: MN152
Pali: divasaṃsantatte ayokaṭāhe dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni nipāteyya
English Translation: He would drop two or three drops of water into an iron pot, [which] was heated during the day.

Sutta Number: SN47.10
Pali: so paṭisaṃharati c’eva na ca vitakketi na ca vicāreti
English Translation: He withdraws [the mind] and does not think or examine.

Sutta Number: AN5.54
Pali: na sukaraṃ uñchena paggahena yāpetuṃ. ayaṃ tatiyo asamayo padhānāya.
English Translation: It is not easy to sustain oneself by means of gleaning and by handouts. This is the third unsuitable time for making effort.

Sutta Number: AN3.83
Pali: tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ
English Translation: Therefore, monks, it should be trained like this.

Sutta Number: MN18
Pali: ettha ce n’atthi abhinanditabbaṃ abhivaditabbaṃ ajjhositabbaṃ, es’ev’anto paṭigh’ānusayānaṃ,
English Translation: If here, there is not [something which] should be delighted in, welcomed, clung to. Just this is the end of the underlying tendency towards conflict.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 12
Pali: mā āyasmā attānaṃ avacanīyaṃ akāsi
English Translation: Venerable, don’t make yourself unadmonishable.

Sutta Number: SN12.63
Pali: kathañ’ca, bhikkhave, kabaḷīkāro āhāro daṭṭhabbo?
English Translation: And how, monks, should edible food be seen?

Sutta Number: AN4.42
Pali: atthi bhikkhave pañho ekaṃsavyākaraṇīyo, atthi bhikkhave pañho vibhajjavyākaraṇīyo … atthi bhikkhave pañho ṭhapanīyo
English Translation: There is, monks, a question which should be answered directly. There is, monks, a question which should be answered by analysing in detail. There is, monks, a question which should be set aside.

Sutta Number: MN20
Pali: adhicittam’anuyuttena, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā pañca nimittāni kālena kālaṃ manasi kātabbāni.
English Translation: Five features should be kept in mind from time to time by a monk who is devoted to the higher mind.

Sutta Number: AN10.48
Pali: dasa’y’ime, bhikkhave, dhammā pabbajitena abhiṇhaṃ paccavekkhitabbā.
English Translation: These ten matters should be regularly reflected on by one who has gone forth.

Sutta Number: DN16.11
Pali: evañ’ca kho eso, bhikkhu, pañho pucchitabbo
English Translation: But, monk, this question should be asked like this.

Sutta Number: AN4.147
Pali: cattāro’me, bhikkhave, kālā sammā bhāviyamānā sammā anuparivattiyamānā anupubbena āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpenti
English Translation: These four times, monks, being correctly developed and done routinely, they lead gradually to the destruction of the defilements.

Sutta Number: AN3.36
Pali: ambho purisa, na tvaṃ addasa manussesu itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā ābādhikaṃ dukkhitaṃ bāḷhagilānaṃ, sake muttakarīse palipannaṃ semānaṃ, aññehi vuṭṭhāpiyamānaṃ, aññehi saṃvesiyamānaṃ?
English Translation: “Look here, man! Did you not see a woman or man among human beings ill, afflicted, extremely ill, lying down immersed in his own urine and excrement, being lifted up by others, being laid down by others?”

Sutta Number: DN16.11
Pali: evaṃ eso pañho pucchitabbo.
English Translation: This question should be asked thus.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 20
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu jānaṃ sappāṇakaṃ udakaṃ tiṇaṃ vā mattikaṃ vā siñceyya vā siñcāpeyya vā, pācittiyaṃ.
English Translation: If any monk should pour out, or should cause to pour out, water on grass or clay, knowing that [it] [is] containing living beings, it is a case requiring confession.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT NID
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu yāvatatiyaṃ anusāviyamāne saramāno santiṃ āpattiṃ n'āvikareyya, sampajānamusāvādo assa hoti.
English Translation: If any monk remembering [an offence] when it is being announced up to three times should not disclose the existing offence, there is [a further offence] for him [of] deliberate false speech.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT NP 14
Pali: orena ce channaṃ vassānaṃ, taṃ santhataṃ vissajjetvā vā avissajjetvā vā, aññaṃ navaṃ santhataṃ kārāpeyya
English Translation: If sooner than [after] six years, having given up or not having given up that coverlet, he should cause to make another new coverlet…

Sutta Number: MN18
Pali: so vata āvuso, cakkhusmiṃ sati rūpe sati cakkhuviññāṇe sati phassapaññattiṃ paññāpessatī’ti — ṭhānaṃ etaṃ vijjati.
English Translation: Certainly, friend, when eye, form, and eye-consciousness are existing, it is possible to declare the concept of contact.

Sutta Number: AN4.180
Pali: tāni ce sutte otāriyamānāni vinaye sandassiyamānāni sutte c'eva otaranti vinaye ca sandissanti
English Translation: If when they are being checked in the scripture(s), [and] being verified in reference to the discipline, and they are found in the scripture(s) as well as seen in the discipline…

Sutta Number: MN27
Pali: so dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti.
English Translation: He teaches the doctrine, beneficial in the beginning, beneficial in the middle, and beneficial in the end, in spirit and in letter; he illuminates the spiritual path, pure [and] altogether complete.

Sutta Number: DN16.21
Pali: bhikkhave, ye te mayā dhammā abhiññā desitā, te vo sādhukaṃ uggahetvā āsevitabbā bhāvetabbā bahulīkātabbā
English Translation: Monks, these things which have been taught by me with direct knowledge (i.e. from my direct knowledge), having been thoroughly grasped by you, they should be pursued, cultivated and practised often.

Sutta Number: AN7.23
Pali: yāvakīvañ’ca bhikkhave bhikkhū apaññattaṃ na paññāpessanti, paññattaṃ na samucchindissanti, yathāpaññattesu sikkhāpadesu samādāya vattissanti
English Translation: As long as monks will not make known what is not declared [and] will not cut off completely what is declared, they will go forward, undertaking training rules as they formulated.

Sutta Number: AN7.49
Pali: āhāre paṭikūlasaññāya paricitena, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cetasā bahulaṃ viharato, rasataṇhāya cittaṃ patilīyati patikuṭati pativattati, na sampasāriyati, upekkhā vā pāṭikulyatā vā saṇṭhāti.
English Translation: For a monk frequently remaining with the mind fortified by the perception of the repulsiveness of food, [his] mind withdraws from, bends back from, rolls back from craving for tastes, equanimity or revulsion is established.

Sutta Number: SN56.11
Pali: taṃ kho pan’idaṃ dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ pahātabban’ti
English Translation: “Moreover, indeed, this noble truth [of] the origin of suffering should be abandoned.”

Sutta Number: VIN PAT PA 3
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu sañcicca manussaviggahaṃ jīvitā voropeyya satthahārakaṃ vā assa pariyeseyya maraṇavaṇṇaṃ vā saṃvaṇṇeyya maraṇāya vā samādapeyya
English Translation: If any monk should intentionally deprive a human being of life or should seek out an assassin for him or should commend the advantage of death or should incite [him] to death…

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 13
Pali: tādisikāya āpattiyā ekaccaṃ pabbājenti ekaccaṃ na pabbājentī”ti, so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi evaṃ assa vacanīyo
English Translation: “They banish a certain one with this kind of offence, [but] they don’t banish another one.” That monk is to be spoken to by the monks like this: …

Sutta Number: VIN PAT NP 7
Pali: santar'uttaraparamaṃ tena bhikkhunā taṃ cīvaraṃ sāditabbaṃ. tato ce uttari sādiyeyya, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ.
English Translation: That robe cloth [for] an under [robe] and an upper [robe] at the most could be accepted by that monk; if he should accept [robe cloth] more than that, [it is] an offence involving relinquishment.

Sutta Number: MN46
Pali: sevitabbe dhamme na jānāti asevitabbe dhamme na jānāti, bhajitabbe dhamme na jānāti abhajitabbe dhamme na jānāti.
English Translation: He doesn’t know the practices that should be followed, he doesn’t know the practices that should not be followed; He doesn’t know the things that should be adhered to, he doesn’t know the practices that should not be adhered to.

Sutta Number: MN2.2
Pali: tassa amanasikaraṇīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ amanasikārā manasikaraṇīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ manasikārā anuppannā c'eva āsavā na uppajjanti, uppannā ca āsavā pahīyanti
English Translation: For him, because of non-attention to the things that should not be attended to [and] attention to the things that should be attended to, unarisen taints do not arise and even taints that have arisen are abandoned.

Sutta Number: SN1.28
Pali: hitvā agāraṃ pabbajitā, hitvā puttaṃ pasuṃ piyaṃ, hitvā rāgaṃ ca dosaṃ ca, avijjaṃ ca virājiya, khīṇ'āsavā arahanto, te lokasmiṃ anussukā.
English Translation: “Having abandoned the household life [and] gone forth, having left their dear child[ren] and livestock, having left behind passion and ill-will, removing ignorance, enlightened beings who have destroyed the taints, they are unagitated in the world.

Sutta Number: AN4.180
Pali: anabhinanditvā appaṭikkositvā tāni padabyañjanāni sādhukaṃ uggahetvā, sutte otāretabbāni vinaye sandassetabbāni.
English Translation: Having not approved of nor rejected these words and phrases, [and] having grasped [them] thoroughly, they should be checked in the discourse[s] and should be verified in the discipline.

Sutta Number: MN21
Pali: atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi, ārādhayiṃsu vata me, bhikkhave, bhikkhū ekaṃ samayaṃ cittaṃ. idha ahaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū āmantesiṃ, ahaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ek'āsanabhojanaṃ bhuñjāmi.
English Translation: And then the Blessed One addressed the monks: “Monks, on one occasion the monks surely pleased my mind. Here (i.e. on that occasion) I addressed the monks [thus]: ‘Indeed, monks, I eat a meal in one sitting’.”


Class 14 Extra

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 6 (simpl)
Pali: saññācikāya pana bhikkhunā kuṭi kārayamānena, assāmikā  att’uddesā, pamāṇikā kāretabbā
English Translation: A hut [that] a monk is causing to be built, by means of his own begging, with no patron [and] intended for himself, should be built according to the correct measurement.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT NP 22
Pali: tena bhikkhunā so patto bhikkhuparisāya nissajjitabbo, yo ca tassā bhikkhuparisāya pattapariyanto, so tassa bhikkhuno padātabbo, ‘‘ayaṃ te bhikkhu patto yāva bhedanāya dhāretabbo’ti, ayaṃ tattha sāmīci.
English Translation: That (alms) bowl is to be relinquished by that monk to the assembly of monks; and that which is the worst bowl of that assembly of monks, that [bowl] should be given to that monk. “Monk, this is your bowl. It should be kept until breaking.” This is the correct procedure in that case.

Sutta Number: MN2.8
Pali: ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabb'āsavasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati, acchejji taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mān'ābhisamayā antam'akāsi dukkhassā'ti
English Translation: Monks, this one is said to be “a monk who dwells restrained with regard to all the taints, [who] completely cut out craving, untied the fetter[s], [and] by means of a thorough comprehension of conceit (thoroughly comprehending conceit), made an end of suffering.”
