Class 11 Exercises

Sutta Number: SN22.43
Pali: attadīpā, bhikkhave, viharatha attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā.
English Translation: you should stay independent, with one's own refuge, does not depend on another, with Dhamma as one’s solid ground, taking refuge in the Dhamma, does not depend on another.

Sutta Number: VIN0
Pali: taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato
English Translation: A good reputation has spread about Venerable Gotama in this way.

Sutta Number: UD73
Pali: atthi bhikkhave ajātaṃ abhūtaṃ akataṃ asaṅkhataṃ
English Translation: Monks, there is [something] not born, not become, not made, not constructed/unconditioned.

Sutta Number: AN8.74
Pali: seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ādittasīso vā ādittasīso vā
English Translation: Monks, just as [a man whose] clothes were on fire or [whose] head was burning…

Sutta Number: ITI111
Pali: āraddhaṃ hoti vīriyaṃ asallīnaṃ, upaṭṭhitā sati asammuṭṭhā, passaddho kāyo asāraddho, samāhitaṃ cittaṃ ekaggaṃ
English Translation: Energy is aroused and active. Mindfulness is present and not forgotten. The body is calm and not excited. The mind is composed and unified.

Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: asite pīte khāyite sāyite sampajānakārī
English Translation: [He is] cultivating attention while eating, drinking, chewing and tasting.

Sutta Number: MN39
Pali: seyyathā’pi puriso ābādhiko assa dukkhito bāḷhagilāno
English Translation: imagine if a person would be ill, miserable, very sick.

Sutta Number: AN2.135
Pali: bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati
English Translation: The foolish, uneducated, wicked man maintains himself injured and damaged.

Sutta Number: AN5.114
Pali: ye te, ānanda, bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhun’āgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ
English Translation: Ananda, those monks who [are] recently ordained, [who] recently come to this teaching and discipline.

Sutta Number: MN152
Pali: upekkhako tattha viharati sato sampajāno
English Translation: He remains there, equanimous, mindful and attentive.

Sutta Number: SNP8
Pali: sakko ujū ca suhujū ca suvaco cassa mudu anatimānī
English Translation: He should be able, straight, upright, meek, gentle and not arrogant.

Sutta Number: SN12.66
Pali: samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā yaṃ loke piyarūpaṃ sātarūpaṃ taṃ aniccato dakkhissanti dukkhato dakkhissanti anattato dakkhissanti rogato dakkhissanti bhayato dakkhissanti, te taṇhaṃ pajahissanti.
English Translation: Ascetics or priests, whatever in the world is agreeable and pleasant, they will see that as impermanent, as painful, as not-self, as a disease, as fearful, they will abandon craving.

Sutta Number: MN41
Pali: atthi dinnaṃ atthi yiṭṭhaṃ atthi hutaṃ
English Translation: There is what is given, there is what is sacrificed, there is what is offered

Sutta Number: DN14.14
Pali: seyyathā’pi suddhaṃ vatthaṃ apagataṃ kāḷakā …
English Translation: Just as clean cloth free from stain…

Sutta Number: AN11.15 (simpl)
Pali: mettāya cetovimuttiyā āsevitāya bhāvitāya bahulīkatāya yānīkatāya vatthukatāya anuṭṭhitāya paricitāya susamāraddhāya ekādasa ānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā.
English Translation: When the liberation of mind by means of goodwill has been practiced persistently, developed, made much of, mastered, made a basis, established, familiarized and energetically undertaken, eleven benefits are to be expected.

Sutta Number: AN4.61(simpl)
Pali: ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyena adhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalena paricitehi seda-avakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammena laddhehi imāni cattāri pattakammāni kattā hoti.
English Translation: The noble disciple, [who] by means of wealth acquired by effort and exertion, completely accumulated by manual labor and by [much] sweat shed, righteous [wealth] obtained by righteous means, is one who does these four worthy deeds.

Sutta Number: MN48 (simpl)
Pali: yāni tāni sīlāni akhaṇḍāni acchiddāni asabalāni akammāsāni bhujissāni viññūhi pasatthāni aparāmaṭṭhāni samādhino saṃvattanikāni
English Translation: Whichever [of] those virtues, which are unbroken, without cracks, not mottled, unblemished, liberating, commended by wise persons, irreproachable and conducive for stability of mind…

Sutta Number: SN22.59
Pali: rūpaṃ atīt'ānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā sabbaṃ rūpaṃ
English Translation: Materiality in the past, present, and future, internally or externally, coarse or fine, low or superior, [that] which [is] near or far away – all materiality ...

Sutta Number: MN64
Pali: yad eva tattha hoti rūpagataṃ vedanāgataṃ saññāgataṃ saṅkhāragataṃ viññāṇagataṃ, te dhamme aniccato dukkhato rogato gaṇḍato sallato aghato ābādhato parato palokato suññato anattato samanupassati.
English Translation: Whatever in that regard there is connected with materiality, connected with feeling, connected with perception, connected with volitional formations, connected with consciousness, he sees those states as impermanent, as suffering, as illness, as a boil, as a dagger, as pain, as alien, as disintegrating, as empty, as not oneself.

Sutta Number: SN22.1
Pali: idha, gahapati, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī ariyadhammassa akovido ariyadhamme avinīto sappurisānaṃ adassāvī sappurisadhammassa akovido sappurisadhamme avinīto rūpaṃ attato samanupassati
English Translation: In this regard, householder, an uninstructed ordinary person who has no regard for noble persons, [who is] not proficient in the noble teaching, [who is] uneducated about the noble teaching, who has no regard for righteous men, [who is] not proficient in the teaching of righteous men, [who is] uneducated about the teaching of righteous men, regards form as self.

Sutta Number: MN137
Pali: cakkhuviññeyyānaṃ rūpānaṃ iṭṭhānaṃ kantānaṃ manāpānaṃ manoramānaṃ lok’āmisena paṭisaṃyuttānaṃ paṭilābhaṃ paṭilābhato samanupassato …
English Translation: For one perceiving acquisition as a personal acquisition of forms perceivable by the eye, related to worldly pleasure, wished for, desirable, pleasant, [and] delightful …

Sutta Number: SN11.3
Pali: svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opanayiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhi
English Translation: The teaching by the Blessed One [is] well taught, directly visible, timeless, inviting one to come and see, practical, [and is] to be understood individually by wise persons.

Sutta Number: MN51 (simpl)
Pali: evam’eva kho bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti kāyaṃ parihārikena cīvarena kucchiṃ parihārikena piṇḍapātena.
English Translation: In the same way, a monk is content with sustaining [his] body with [his] robe, [and] with looking after [his] stomach with alms food.

Sutta Number: MN39
Pali: evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigat’ūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivās'ānussatiñāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti.
English Translation: When [his] mind is thus collected, [when it] has become pure, bright, spotless, without defilement, pliable workable, stabilized, [and] imperturbable, he inclines [his] mind for the knowledge from the recollection of previous lives.

Sutta Number: SN22.59
Pali: nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati. vimuttasmiṃ vimuttam’iti ñāṇaṃ hoti. 'khīṇā jāti vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ
English Translation: Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. On account of the dispassion, he is released. When liberated, there is the knowledge, “[the mind is] liberated.” [He understands:] “Birth is exhausted, the holy life is completed…”

Sutta Number: SN12.70
Pali: tassa me, bhante, bhagavā accayaṃ accayato paṭiggaṇhātu, āyatiṃ saṁvarāya
English Translation: Therefore, Venerable Sir, may the Blessed One accept my fault as fault, for the sake of [my] restraint in the future.

Class 11 Extra

Sutta Number: DHP12 (simpl)
Pali: sāraṃ ca sārato ñatvā, asāraṃ ca asārato, te sāraṃ adhigacchanti, sammāsaṅkappe gocarā.
English Translation: And the teacher determined this world for me as impermanent, unstable, and insubstantial. Having known the essential as essential and the inessential as inessential, they attain the essence — [their] domain [is] in right intention.

Sutta Number: TH262
Pali: satthā ca me lokaṃ imaṃ adhiṭṭhahi, aniccato addhuvato asārato, pakkhanda maṃ citta jinassa sāsane, tārehi oghā mahatā suduttarā.
English Translation: And the teacher determined this world for me as impermanent, unstable, and insubstantial. O mind, make me leap forth into the teachings of the conqueror; save me from the great torrent, extremely difficult to cross.

Sutta Number: MN22
Pali: attani ca, bhikkhave, attaniye ca saccato thetato anupalabbhamāne, yam'pi taṃ diṭṭhiṭṭhānaṃ, — so loko so attā, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo, sassatisamaṃ tath'eva ṭhassāmī'ti, — nanu ayaṃ, bhikkhave, kevalo paripūro bāladhammo'ti?
English Translation: “Monks, since oneself and what belongs to oneself is not being found as true and reliable, [then] the ground for views, [namely,] ‘that which the world [is] the self (world = self); after death I will be permanent, enduring, eternal; with an unchanging nature I will remain in the same way for ever and ever’ – wouldn’t this, monks, [be] a totally complete doctrine of fools?”

Sutta Number: SN6.2
Pali: ye ca atītā sambuddhā, ye ca buddhā anāgatā. yo ca eta’r’ahi sambuddho, bahunnaṃ sokanāsano.
English Translation: The Awakened Ones who are past, and the Buddhas not yet come and the present Awakened One [are] dispeller[s] of sorrow for many.

Sutta Number: DHP86 (simpl)
Pali: ye ca kho sammā-akkhāte dhamme dhammaṃ anuvattino, te janā pāraṃ essanti, maccuno dheyyaṃ suduttaraṃ.
English Translation: Indeed, whoever acting according to the teaching in the perfectly declared teaching, those people will go to the far shore; the realm of death, extremely difficult to cross.

Sutta Number: SNP16
Pali: phuṭṭhassa lokadhammehi, cittaṃ yassa na kampati. asokaṃ virajaṃ khemaṃ, etaṃ maṅgalam’uttamaṃ.
English Translation: A mind of [a person] who, touched by worldly matters, is not disturbed, [but rather] free from sadness, untainted, at peace – this [is] the ultimate blessing.
