Class 9 Exercises

Sutta Number: VIN0
Pali: āraddhaṃ kho pana me, brāhmaṇa, vīriyaṃ ahosi.
English Translation: Effort was truly aroused by me, Brahman.

Sutta Number: MN9
Pali: dūrato mayaṃ āgaccheyyāma āyasmato sāriputtassa santike etassa bhāsitassa atthaṃ aññātuṃ
English Translation: We would come from far away in the presence of Ven. Sāriputta to learn the meaning of this saying.

Sutta Number: SN12.61
Pali: assutavā puthujjano n’ālaṃ nibbindituṃ n’ālaṃ virajjituṃ n’ālaṃ vimuccituṃ
English Translation: An uneducated common person [is] not able to become disenchanted, [is] not able to become dispassionate, [is] not able to become free.

Sutta Number: AN3.112
Pali: tīṇi imāni, bhikkhave, nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. katamāni tīṇi?
English Translation: Monks, [there are] these three origins for the arising of kamma.

Sutta Number: SN22.59
Pali: yaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ taṃ samanupassituṃ, etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti?
English Translation: Whatever is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to change. Is it suitable to regard that [as]: “this is mine, I am this, this is my self”?

Sutta Number: AN4.42
Pali: cattāri imāni, bhikkhave, pañha-vyākaraṇāni . katamāni cattāri?
English Translation: Monks, [there are] these four [ways] [of] answering questions. What four?

Sutta Number: AN3.66
Pali: alaṃ hi vo, kālāmā, kaṅkhituṃ alaṃ vicikicchituṃ
English Translation: It is definitely suitable for you, Kalamas, to doubt, it is suitable to be unsure.

Sutta Number: MN13
Pali: atha kho tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ etadahosi, atippago sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya carituṃ, yaṃ nūna mayaṃ yena paribbājakānaṃ ārāmo tena upasaṅkameyyāmā'ti
English Translation: And then, this [thought] occurred to those monks: It’s too early to walk for alms in Sāvatthi. Let us approach the park of the wandering ascetics.

Sutta Number: MN39
Pali: seyyathāpi bhikkhave puriso odātena vatthena sasīsaṃ pārupetvā nisinno assa
English Translation: Imagine if, monks, a man would be seated, covered with a white cloth up to the head.

Sutta Number: DN5.2
Pali: samaṇo gotamo arahati bhavantaṃ kūṭadantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamituṃ
English Translation: The recluse Gotama ought to visit sir Kūṭadanta to see him.

Sutta Number: MN13
Pali: atha kho te bhikkhū sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā …
English Translation: After that, those monks, having walked for alms food in Sāvatthi…

Sutta Number: MN107 (simpl)
Pali: aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayaṃ dassāvī, samādāya sikkhāhi sikkhāpadesu
English Translation: Seeing fear with regard to the slightest fault, train yourself [by] undertaking the training precepts.

Sutta Number: MN38
Pali: ahesumha nu kho mayaṃ atītam'addhānaṃ, nanu kho ahesumha atītam'addhānaṃ, kiṃ nu kho ahesumha atītam'addhānaṃ?
English Translation: Were we in the past? Were we not in the past? What indeed were we in the past?

Sutta Number: DN16.21
Pali: taṃ assa bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lok’ānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānaṃ
English Translation: That would be for the benefit [and] the happiness of many people, out of compassion for the world, [it would be] for the benefit, advantage and comfort of gods and humans.

Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: sakkā nu kho, bho gotama, imasmiṃ dhammavinaye evam’eva anupubbasikkhā anupubbakiriyā anupubbapaṭipadā paññapetuṃ?
English Translation: Master Gotama, is it possible, similarly, to describe gradual training, gradual undertaking, gradual progress in this Doctrine-and-Discipline?

Sutta Number: DN16.21
Pali: seyyathidaṃ — cattāro satipaṭṭhānā cattāro sammappadhānā cattāro iddhipādā pañc’indriyāni pañca balāni satta bojjh'aṅgā ariyo aṭṭh’aṅgiko maggo.
English Translation: [They are] as follows: four foundations of mindfulness, four right efforts, four bases for psychic power, five faculties, five mental powers, seven enlightenment factors [and] the Noble Eightfold Path.

Sutta Number: SN12.2
Pali: jarā jīraṇatā khaṇḍiccaṃ pāliccaṃ valittacatā āyuno saṃhāni indriyānaṃ paripāko; ayaṃ vuccati jarā.
English Translation: Ageing, decrepitude, brokenness, grayness of hair, wrinkled skin, dwindling of the life force, deterioration of the sense faculties; this is called old age.

Sutta Number: SN35.28
Pali: ghānasmiṃ api nibbindati gandhesu api nibbindati ghānaviññāṇe api nibbindati ghānasamphasse api nibbindati
English Translation: He is disenchanted with regard to the nose, also with regard to smell, he is disenchanted with regard to nose consciousness as well, he is even disenchanted with regard to nose contact.

Sutta Number: MN27
Pali: na sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ek’antaparipuṇṇaṃ ek’antaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ.
English Translation: It is not easy [for] one domestically settled at home to live the completely perfect, completely pure holy life, polished like mother-of-pearl.

Sutta Number: SN42.6
Pali: bhagavā pana, bhante, arahaṃ sammāsambuddho pahoti tathā kātuṃ yathā sabbo loko kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyya?
English Translation: But, venerable sir, the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the Perfectly Enlightened One is able to make all the world thus, so that after the breaking up of the body, after death, that it might be reborn in a good destination, a heavenly world.

Sutta Number: SN22.33
Pali: yaṃ, bhikkhave, na tumhākaṃ, taṃ pajahatha. taṃ vo pahīnaṃ hitāya sukhāya bhavissati. kiñ’ca, bhikkhave, na tumhākaṃ?
English Translation: Whatever is not yours, monks, abandon that; [when] that has been abandoned by you, it will be for [your] benefit and happiness. And what, monks, is not yours?

Sutta Number: MN2.2
Pali: ‘ahaṃ nu kho asmi? no nu kho asmi? kiṃ nu kho asmi? kathaṃ nu kho asmi? ayaṃ nu kho satto kuto āgato? so kuhiṃ gāmī bhavissati iti?
English Translation: “Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? From where has this living being come? Where will he be heading?”

Sutta Number: SN12.63
Pali: atha puriso āgaccheyya jīvitu'kāmo amaritu'kāmo sukhakāmo dukkhappaṭikūlo
English Translation: Then a man would come along, wishing to live, not wishing to die, wishing for ease, averse to suffering.

Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, idha puriso āgaccheyya rājagahaṃ gantu'kāmo. so taṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadeyya, "icchāmi ahaṃ, bhante, rājagahaṃ gantuṃ, tassa me rājagahassa maggaṃ upadisā'ti.
English Translation: What do you think [about] this, brahmin; here, a man would come along wishing to go to Rājagaha. Having approached you, he would say, “Venerable sir, I wish to go to Rājagaha. Point out the way to Rājagaha to me.”

Sutta Number: SN22.59
Pali: yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ anattā, tasmā rūpaṃ ābādhāya saṃvattati
English Translation: Because form is indeed not self; therefore it is leading to illness.

Sutta Number: MN22
Pali: evam'eva kho, bhikkhave, kull'ūpamo mayā dhammo desito nittharaṇ'atthāya, no gahaṇ'atthāya.
English Translation: Monks, the Dhamma explained by me [is] similar to a raft, it is for the purpose of crossing over and not holding onto.


Class 9 Extra

Sutta Number: DHP185
Pali: mattaññutā ca bhattasmiṃ, pantaṃ ca sayan’āsanaṃ,  adhicitte ca āyogo, etaṃ buddhānaṃ sāsanaṃ.
English Translation: Moderation in regard to food, a secluded living place [i.e. living in seclusion], and devotion to mental development; this is the teaching of the Buddhas.

Sutta Number: TH251
Pali: tasmā hi paññā eva dhanena seyyā, yāya vosānaṃ idha adhigacchati. Abyositattā hi bhav’ābhavesu, pāpāni kammāni karoti mohā.
English Translation: Therefore, only wisdom is indeed better than wealth; by it [i.e. wisdom] one attains perfection here/in this world; indeed, because of not being accomplished, out of delusion, one does evil actions in any states of existence.

Sutta Number: TH257
Pali: jīvitānaṃ parikkhāre, bhesajje atha paccaye, na bāḷhaṃ ussukā āsuṃ.
English Translation: They were not overly zealously desiring medicines and requisites for life.

Sutta Number: DHP152 (simpl)
Pali: appassuto puriso, balibaddho va jīrati,  maṃsāni tassa vaḍḍhanti, paññā tassa na vaḍḍhati.
English Translation: An unlearned man ages like an ox, his flesh increases, his wisdom does not increase.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 6
Pali: sārambhe ce bhikkhu vatthusmiṃ aparikkamane saññācikāya kuṭiṃ kāreyya bhikkhū vā anabhineyya vatthuṃ desanāya pamāṇaṃ vā atikkāmeyya, saṅghādiseso.
English Translation: If a monk by his own begging should build a hut on a site entailing harm to creatures and not accessible (i.e. not having a surrounding space), or [if] he should not invite monks for allocating a place, or [if] he should exceed the measurement, it is an offence requiring suspension.

Sutta Number: AN8.49 (simpl)
Pali: tattha sā dakkhā hoti analasā tatr'upāyāya vīmaṃsāya samannāgatā alaṃ kātuṃ alaṃ saṃvidhātuṃ.
English Translation: There, she is skilled and energetic, endowed with relevant discrimination [and] is able to organize and do [the domestic chores for her husband].

Sutta Number: AN8.13
Pali: jegucchī hoti uccāraṃ vā passāvaṃ vā abhinisīdituṃ vā abhinipajjituṃ vā.
English Translation: He is one who hates to sit or lie down on excrement or urine.

Sutta Number: MN52
Pali: evam'eva kho ahaṃ, bhante, imesaṃ ekādasannaṃ amatadvārānaṃ ekam'ekena api amatadvārena sakkuṇissāmi attānaṃ sotthiṃ kātuṃ.
English Translation: Indeed, in the same way [as the man fleeing from a fire in a house with eleven doors], I, too, by myself will be able to safely flee [lit: do] through any of the eleven doors to the deathless state

Sutta Number: SNP61
Pali: eko ahaṃ sakka mahantaṃ oghaṃ, anissito no visahāmi tārituṃ
English Translation: Sakyan, alone and independent, I am unable to cross over the great flood.

Sutta Number: SNP46 (simpl)
Pali: yesu idha n'atthi paramaṃ uggahītaṃ, tesu tvaṃ kiṃ labhe pasūra?
English Translation: What, Pasūra, would you gain among them here, those for whom there is nothing grasped as ultimate?

Sutta Number: VIN4.1.14
Pali: na te ahaṃ sakkomi vitthārena dhammaṃ desetuṃ
English Translation: I am not able to explain the Teaching to you thoroughly.
