Class 4 Exercises  

Sutta Number: DHP26 (simpl)  
Pali: bālā pamādaṃ anuyuñjanti  
English Translation: Fools indulge in negligence.  

Sutta Number: AN3.66 (simpl)  
Pali: sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjāmi  
English Translation: I go towards a good destination, a heavenly plane of existence.  

Sutta Number: AN3.70  
Pali: abhisaṅkharoti kāyena kusalaṃ  
English Translation: He does good deeds by means of the body.  

Sutta Number: DN22.5  
Pali: ime sālī ime vīhī ime muggā ime māsā ime tilā ime taṇḍulā’ti  
English Translation: “These are fine rices, these are paddy, these are mung beans, these are speckled beans, these are sesame, these are dehusked rice.”  

Sutta Number: UD45  
Pali: atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi  
English Translation: And then the Blessed One addressed the monks.  

Sutta Number: SN21.9 (simpl)  
Pali: atha kho āyasmā tisso upasaṅkami, ekamantaṃ nisīdi  
English Translation: And then Venerable Tissa approached and sat down to one side.  

Sutta Number: SN35.121  
Pali: āyasmā rāhulo bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandi  
English Translation: Venerable Rahula delighted in the speech of the Blessed One.  

Sutta Number: MN39 (simpl)  
Pali: ahaṃ sakamhā gāmā amuṃ gāmaṃ agacchiṃ  
English Translation: I went from my own village to such-and-such a village.  

Sutta Number: AN5.57  
Pali: byādhi dhammo amhi  
English Translation: I am of the nature to get sick. (lit. I am of the sickness nature)   

Sutta Number: MN39  
Pali: samaṇā amhā’ti paṭijānātha  
English Translation: You all claim, “We are ascetics.”  

Sutta Number: MN39 (simpl)  
Pali: tatra evaṃ aṭṭhāsiṃ evaṃ nisīdiṃ evaṃ abhāsiṃ evaṃ tuṇhī ahosiṃ  
English Translation: There I stood, I sat, I spoke, and I remained silent.  

Sutta Number: SN2.8 (simpl)  
Pali: chinda sotaṃ parakkama, kāme panūda brāhmaṇa  
English Translation: Cross the stream, strive, dispel sensual pleasures, O holy man!  

Sutta Number: SN56.11  
Pali: paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi  
English Translation: Wisdom arose, knowledge arose, light arose.  

Sutta Number: SN22.59 (simpl)  
Pali: evaṃ me saṅkhārā hontu  
English Translation: Let my volitional formations be thus.  

Sutta Number: SN22.59  
Pali: bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanduṃ  
English Translation: The monks were pleased with the utterance of the Blessed One.  

Sutta Number: SN12.2 (simpl)  
Pali: dukkhassa khandhassa samudayo hoti  
English Translation: There is the arising of the aggregate of suffering.  

Sutta Number: DHP153 (simpl)  
Pali: gahassa kāraka, diṭṭho asi  
English Translation: Builder of a house, you are seen.  

Sutta Number: MN10 (simpl)  
Pali: atthi kāyo’ti sati hoti  
English Translation: There is mindfulness: “there is a body.”  

Sutta Number: VIN2.5.1.2  
Pali: santi idha ekacce khattiyā ca brāhmaṇā’ti bhaṇati  
English Translation: He says, “There are here some noblemen [and] brahmins.”  

Sutta Number: MN39  
Pali: me āsi kāye balaṃ  
English Translation: Power was in my body.  

Sutta Number: AN4.48 (simpl)  
Pali: paggaṇhahi isīnaṃ dhajaṃ  
English Translation: Raise up a banner of the sages!  

Sutta Number: SN46.53 (simpl)  
Pali: bhikkhū paribbājakehi sammodiṃsu  
English Translation: The monks exchanged pleasantries with the wandering ascetics.  

Sutta Number: MN95 (simpl)  
Pali: saccaṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ apucchimha, saccaṃ bhavaṃ gotamo byākāsi  
English Translation: We asked Master Gotama (about) the truth; Master Gotama explained the truth.  

Sutta Number: SN22.59  
Pali: bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ  
English Translation: The monks replied to the Blessed One.  

Sutta Number: AN3.156  
Pali: arogā sukhitā hotha  
English Translation: May you all be happy (and) free from disease. 

Sutta Number: MN86  
Pali: coro ahaṃ pure āsiṃ, aṅgulimālo vissuto … buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ āgamiṃ  
English Translation: I was formerly a thief, the famous Angulimāla … I came to the Buddha (for) refuge.  

Sutta Number: AN5.28 (simpl)  
Pali: ariyassa samādhissa bhāvanaṃ desesiṃ  
English Translation: I taught the cultivation of noble composure.  

Sutta Number: DN16.39  
Pali: upaddutā homa — ‘idaṃ kappati…'  
English Translation: We are afflicted—“this is suitable …”  



Class 4 Extra  

Sutta Number: MN98  
Pali: kassako kammunā hoti, sippiko hoti kammunā, vāṇijo kammunā hoti, pessako hoti kammunā  
English Translation: By one’s actions, one is a farmer, a craftsman, a trader, a messenger.  

Sutta Number: DHP183  
Pali: nibbindati dukkhe esa maggo visuddhiyā  
English Translation: One is disenchanted with suffering, this [is] the path for purification.  

Sutta Number: TH257 (simpl)  
Pali: evaṃ gāme muni cari  
English Translation: The sage walked in the village like this.  

Sutta Number: MN107 (simpl)  
Pali: kāyassa saṃvarāya paṭipajjāhi, rakkhāhi kāyaṃ, kāye saṃvaraṃ āpajjāhi  
English Translation: Practice for restraint of the body (faculty), guard the body (faculty), arouse restraint in regard to the body (faculty).  

Sutta Number: SN35.28 (modif)  
Pali: rāgassa agginā dosassa agginā mohassa agginā saddo ādippati  
English Translation: The sound is burning with the fire of lust, with the fire of hatred, with the fire of delusion.  

Sutta Number: TH257 (modif)  
Pali: samaṇassa ahu vitakko  
English Translation: It was a thought of the recluse.  
