Class 2 Exercises

namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā-sambuddhassa
Homage to him, the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the fully Enlightened One.

avijjāya tv'eva asesa-virāga-nirodhā saṅkhāra-nirodho, saṅkhāra-nirodhā viññāṇa-nirodho, viññāṇa-nirodhā nāmarūpa-nirodho, nāmarūpa-nirodhā saḷāyatana-nirodho, saḷāyatana-nirodhā phassa-nirodho, phassa-nirodhā vedanā-nirodho, vedanā-nirodhā taṇhā-nirodho, taṇhā-nirodhā upādāna-nirodho, upādāna-nirodhā bhava-nirodho, bhava-nirodhā jāti-nirodho, jāti-nirodhā jarā-maraṇaṃ soka-parideva-dukkha-domanass'upāyāsā nirujjhanti.
But from the complete fading away and cessation of ignorance there is cessation of volitional formations; from the cessation of volitional formations, cessation of consciousness; from the cessation of consciousness, cessation of name-and-form; from the cessation of name-and-form, cessation of the six sense bases; from the cessation of the six sense bases, cessation of contact; from the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; from the cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; from the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; from the cessation of clinging, cessation of existence; from the cessation of existence, cessation of birth; from the cessation of birth, aging-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair cease.

SN 10.8
buddho kira loke uppanno
A Buddha has indeed arisen in the world.
 
TH 257 (simpl)
araññe rukkhānaṃ mūlesu, kandarāsu guhāsu ca
At the foot of a tree in a forest, in valleys, and in caves.

DN 22.1 (simpl)
maggo hoti sokaparidevānaṃ samatikkamāya, ñāyassa adhigamāya, nibbānassa sacchikiriyāya.
It is the path for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the attainment of the (right) method, for personal experience of total emancipation.

AN 10.48
uttarissa manussassa dhammo alam’ariyo ñāṇadassanassa viseso
the state of a superior human being, the attainment of knowing and seeing, suitable for a noble person,

DN 22.5
atthi imasmiṃ kāye kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco
There are in this body, hair [on the head], hairs of the body, nails, teeth, skin.

VIN PAT SE 55 (simpl)
na sāmisena hatthena pānīyassa thālakaṃ paṭiggahessāmi iti sikkhā karaṇīyā
I will not take a cup for drinking water with a soiled hand.

VIN PAT NID nidānuddeso
saṅgho uposathaṃ kareyya, pātimokkhaṃ uddiseyya
The community of monks could make an observance day [and] would recite the training rules.

itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti
It is so (thus) “He [is] the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the fully Enlightened One, endowed with wisdom and ethical conduct, Fortunate One, knower of the world, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, the Awakened One, the Blessed One.”

VIN 1.1.3
1. kāyassa bhedā
From the break-up of the body

AN 10.29 
2. samaṇo gotamo
The recluse Gotama

SN 22.57
3. virāgāya nirodhāya 
for dispassion, for cessation

TH 251
4. bālassa mohāya
for the delusion of the fool

TH 251
5. kāmehi lokamhi
[there is no satisfaction] by sensual pleasures in the world

6. devā manussā
gods and humans

SN 56.11
7. cāgo paṭinissaggo anālayo 
The relinquishing, the abandonment, the non-attachment

MN 107
8. pāde pādaṃ
[he places] a foot on a foot

DN 22.18
9. dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ
[he arouses] desire for the arising of states of mind

VIBH 6.1
10. khandhānaṃ bhedo 
the break-up of the aggregates

% AN 8.53
11. dhammā virāgāya
[these] things/qualities [lead] to dispassion

AN 8.79
12. dhammā sekhassa
qualities of a trainee

SN 56.11
13. samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā
with either a recluse or a brahmin or a deity or Mara

% SN 22.59
14. saṅkhārā ābādhāya
Volitional formations [are conducive for] disease

SN 35.28
15. sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi
(burning) with griefs, lamentations, sufferings, distresses, afflictions

16. dhammo vinayo 
The Doctrine-Discipline

SN 12.41
17. vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ
[reborn] in a state of suffering, in hell.

18. aparena samayena buddho
on another occasion, the Awakened One…

VIN 1.4.1.2
19. gabbhe cīvaraṃ
the robe in the room

VIN 1.1.4
20. āvāse vassaṃ
(entered) the rainy season at the dwelling place.

MN 99
21. nīvaraṇehi brāhmaṇo
The brahmin [filled] with the [five] hindrances

22. kāme brāhmaṇa
O, brahmin! … sensual pleasures

DHP 331
23. atthamhi sahāyā
[Good are] friends in [arisen] need 
[Good are] friends when need [arises]

MN 35
24. gotamo sāvake … gotamassa sāvakesu
Gotama [trains] disciples…. Gotama’s [instruction presented] to disciples

SN 19.21
25. kassapassa vinayasmiṃ 
in the discipline of the Kassapa

$ AN 8.19
26. saṅghamhā saṅgho 
[far] from the Saṅgha [and] the Saṅgha [is far from]