Class 12 Exercises

Sutta Number: MN4
Pali: anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarāmi, seyyathidaṃ - ekam’pi jātiṃ dve’pi jātiyo tisso’pi jātiyo catasso’pi jātiyo pañca’pi jātiyo dasa’pi jātiyo vīsam’pi jātiyo tiṃsam’pi jātiyo cattālīsam’pi jātiyo paññāsam’pi jātiyo jātisatam’pi jātisahassam’pi jātisatasahassam’pi
English Translation: I recollected manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births

Sutta Number: MN16
Pali: seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kukkuṭiyā aṇḍāni aṭṭha vā dasa vā dvādasa vā.
English Translation: Imagine if, monks, there could be hen’s eggs, eight or ten or twelve.

Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāsamuddo ekaraso loṇaraso, evam’eva kho, bhikkhave, ayaṃ dhammavinayo ekaraso vimuttiraso
English Translation: Monks, just as the great ocean has one taste, the taste of salt. Likewise, monks, this teaching and training has one taste, the flavour of liberation.

Sutta Number: SN1.37
Pali: ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sabbeh’eva arahantehi
English Translation: On one occasion, the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans. With a community of monks, five hundred monks, all exclusively arahants.

Sutta Number: AN1.12
Pali: n’āhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammam’pi samanupassāmi yena anuppanno byāpādo uppajjati, yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭighanimittaṃ
English Translation: I don’t see even one single other thing, monks, because of which unarisen ill-will arises, such as a disliked image.

Sutta Number: SN56.14
Pali: cattāri imāni, bhikkhave, ariyasaccāni. katamāni cattāri?
English Translation: Monks, [there are] these four noble truths, which four?

Sutta Number: SN12.63
Pali: kabaḷīkāro āhāro oḷāriko vā sukhumo vā, phasso dutiyo, manosañcetanā tatiyā, viññāṇaṃ catutthaṃ
English Translation: heavy or refined edible food, sense contact is the second, mental volition is the third, consciousness is the fourth

Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: ayaṃ, bhikkhave, imasmiṃ dhammavinaye chaṭṭho acchariyo abbhuto dhammo
English Translation: Monks, this is the sixth wonderful and amazing quality in this Dhamma and Vinaya.

Sutta Number: DN13.8
Pali: so mettāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ, tathā tatiyaṃ, tathā catutthaṃ
English Translation: He dwells/abides having pervaded one direction with a mind full of lovingkindness. Likewise, the second, third and fourth.

Sutta Number: DN9.6
Pali: eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino
English Translation: Some monks and brahmins who hold the view, [who are] of the opinion…

Sutta Number: SN36.22
Pali: aṭṭhārasa api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; chattiṃsa api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; aṭṭhasataṃ api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena.
English Translation: I have spoken [of] eighteen feelings in one way, also I have spoken of thirty-six feelings by [another] way, also I have spoken of one hundred and eight feelings by [another] way.

Sutta Number: SN56.11 (simpl)
Pali: yāvakīvañ'ca me, bhikkhave, imesu catūsu ariyasaccesu saha tīhi parivaṭṭehi saha dvādasahi ākārehi yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ na suvisuddhaṃ ahosi,
English Translation: Monks, as long as for me, knowledge and vision were not perfectly purified with regard to the Four Noble Truths as they truly are in [their] three phases together with [their] twelve aspects….

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 11
Pali: tassa eva kho pana bhikkhussa bhikkhū honti, anuvattakā vaggavādakā, eko vā dve vā tayo vā, te evaṃ vadeyyuṃ
English Translation: But now there are monks who are followers of just that monk, [and] who are proponents of [his] faction – one or two or three – [and] they should say thus…

Sutta Number: SN12.2
Pali: cattāro ca mahābhūtā, catunnaṃ ca mahābhūtānaṃ upādāya rūpaṃ – idaṃ vuccati rūpaṃ.
English Translation: The four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements; this is called material form.

Sutta Number: SN11.3
Pali: yad'idaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā, esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho
English Translation: This is the community of disciples of the Blessed One, namely, the four pairs of persons, the eight individuals.

Sutta Number: DN14.14
Pali: evam'eva tesaṃ caturāsītīnaṃ pāṇānaṃ sahassānaṃ tasmiṃ eva āsane virajaṃ vītamalaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ udapādi
English Translation: Similarly, spotless, untainted spiritual insight arose for those eighty-four thousand beings just in that place.

Sutta Number: AN10.8
Pali: imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu samanta'pāsādiko ca hoti sabb'ākāraparipūro ca
English Translation: Surely, a monk endowed with these ten qualities is one who is complete in every aspect and who inspires confidence in every way.

Sutta Number: AN10.61
Pali: pañca ahaṃ nīvaraṇe sāhāre vadāmi, no anāhāre. ko ca āhāro pañcannaṃ nīvaraṇānaṃ? tīṇi duccaritāni
English Translation: I speak of five hindrances with nutriment, [they are] not without nutriment. And what is the nutriment of the five hindrances? The three [kinds of] misconduct.

Sutta Number: SN12.63 (simpl)
Pali: taṃ kiṃ maññatha, api nu so puriso divasaṃ tīhi sattīhi satehi haññamāno tatonidānaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvediyeyya?
English Translation: “What do you think? Wouldn’t that man, being struck during the day with three hundred spears, experience suffering and distress on that account?”

Sutta Number: AN4.67
Pali: namo bhagavato, namo sattannaṃ sammāsambuddhānaṃ
English Translation: Homage to the Blessed One, homage to the seven Perfectly Enlightened Ones.

Sutta Number: SN12.61
Pali: dissati ayaṃ, bhikkhave, cātumahābhūtiko kāyo ekaṃ api vassaṁ tiṭṭhamāno dve api vassāni tiṭṭhamāno tīṇi ... cattāri ... pañca ... dasa ... vīsati ... tiṃsaṃ ... cattārīsaṃ api vassāni tiṭṭhamāno paññāsaṃ api vassāni tiṭṭhamāno vassasataṃ api tiṭṭhamāno, bhiyyo api tiṭṭhamāno.
English Translation: It is observed, monks, [that] this body, composed of the four great elements, is standing just one year, [or] just two years, … three … four … five … ten … twenty … thirty … forty … fifty [or] remaining one hundred years [or] even remaining more than [that].

Sutta Number: UD46
Pali: evaṃ, bhante'ti kho āyasmā soṇo bhagavato paṭissutvā soḷasa aṭṭhakavaggikāni sabbāni eva sarena abhaṇi.
English Translation: “Yes, venerable sir.” Having responded in agreement to the Blessed One, Venerable Soṇa indeed recited melodiously all sixteen [suttas], belonging to the groups of eight.

Sutta Number: MN91
Pali: tassa imāni satta ratanāni bhavanti, seyyath'idaṃ, cakkaratanaṃ, hatthiratanaṃ, assaratanaṃ, maṇiratanaṃ, itthiratanaṃ, gahapatiratanaṃ, pariṇāyakaratanaṃ eva sattamaṃ.
English Translation: [A Wheel-turning Monarch] has these seven treasures, namely: the wheel treasure, the elephant treasure, the horse treasure, the jewel treasure, the woman treasure, the steward treasure, [and] as the seventh, the counselor treasure. 

Class 12 Extra

Sutta Number: SNP5
Pali: caturo samaṇā na pañcam’atthi, te te āvikaromi sakkhipuṭṭho.
English Translation: There are four (kinds of) ascetics, there is not a fifth. Questioned face to face, I will clarify those for you.

Sutta Number: SNP13 (simpl)
Pali: catūhi apāyehi ca vippamutto, cha ca abhiṭhānāni abhabbo kātuṃ
English Translation: One is released from the four states of misery and is unable to perform the six heinous crimes.

Sutta Number: SNP13
Pali: ye ariyasaccāni vibhāvayanti, gambhīrapaññena sudesitāni. kiñ'c'āpi te honti bhusaṃ pamattā, na te bhavaṃ aṭṭhamaṃ ādiyanti.
English Translation: They who understand clearly the Noble Truths well taught by one with profound wisdom, even though they are exceedingly negligent, they do not grasp an eighth state of existence.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT AN 1
Pali: tam'enaṃ saddheyyavacasā upāsikā disvā tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ aññatarena vadeyya, pārājikena vā saṅghādisesena vā pācittiyena vā
English Translation: …a lay woman, whose words can be trusted, having then seen that should speak in accordance with one of three rules: according to an offence involving defeat, according to an offence requiring suspension, according to an offence requiring confession.

Sutta Number: SNP13
Pali: vanappagumbe yathā phussit’agge, gimhāna-māse paṭhamasmiṃ gimhe, tath’ūpamaṃ dhamma-varaṃ adesayi, nibbāna-gāmiṃ paramaṃ hitāya.
English Translation: Like a forest grove with a flowering crest,
in the first heat of the hot month,
(The Buddha) taught the sublime teaching,
leading to the highest Nibbāna, for the benefit.

Sutta Number: AN9.15
Pali: seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṇḍo anekavassagaṇiko. tassa assu gaṇḍassa nava vaṇamukhāni nava abhedanamukhāni.
English Translation: Imagine, monks, a boil many years old. That boil would have nine wound openings, nine natural orifices.

Sutta Number: SNP6
Pali: iti h'etaṃ vijānāma, navamo so parābhavo. dasamaṃ bhagavā brūhi. kiṃ parābhavato mukhaṃ?
English Translation: Indeed this we understand, [that] this [is] the ninth downfall. May the Blessed One tell [us] the tenth: What [is] the cause of the downfall?
