Class 8 Exercises

Sutta Number: AN8.30
Pali: nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi
English Translation: Having sat down, the Blessed One addressed the monks.

Sutta Number: MN39
Pali: vivicca kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi, paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati
English Translation: Having separated from sense pleasures and unwholesome mental states, he arrives at the first stage of meditation and remains there.

Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: mahānadiyo mahāsamuddaṃ patvā jahanti purimāni nāmagottāni
English Translation: The great rivers, upon reaching the mighty ocean, they give up (their) old names.

Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: mahāmoggallāno taṃ puggalaṃ bāhāyaṃ gahetvā nikkhāmetvā yena bhagavā ten’upasaṅkami.
English Translation: The Great Mogallana seized that person by the arm, expelled (him), then approached the Blessed One.

Sutta Number: SN47.10
Pali: āyasmā ānando tā bhikkhuniyo dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi
English Translation: Venerable Ananda taught, instigated, fired up and delighted those nuns with a righteous talk, stood up from his seat and went.

Sutta Number: SN12.61
Pali: seyyathāpi makkaṭo araññe sākhaṃ gaṇhati taṃ muñcitvā aññaṃ gaṇhati taṃ muñcitvā aññaṃ gaṇhati
English Translation: Just like a monkey in the forest [who] grabs hold of a branch, releases it, then grabs hold of another and after releasing it, grabs hold of another.

Sutta Number: DNa2.3.3
Pali: sā pattaṃ gahetvā ākāse khipi. patto ākāse aṭṭhāsi
English Translation: She grabbed a bowl and threw it into the sky. The bowl remained there.

Sutta Number: DN22.1
Pali: dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ
English Translation: One who watches mental phenomena lives among the phenomena ardent, knowing clearly, mindful, removing craving and mental suffering towards the world.

Sutta Number: UD45
Pali: āyasmā ānando uṭṭhāya āsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca.
English Translation: Venerable Ananda, rising from his seat and adjusting his upper robe over one shoulder, stretched out his palms towards the Blessed One and said this.

Sutta Number: SN6.5
Pali: atha kho bhagavā tassa brahmuno upari vehāsaṃ pallaṅkena nisīdi tejodhātuṃ samāpajjitvā
English Translation: And then the Blessed One, having attained the fire element, sat above that god in the sky in a cross-legged sitting posture.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT PA 1
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu sikkhaṃ apaccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ anāvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseveyya pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso
English Translation: And whichever monk, not renouncing the training, and not having disclosed his weakness, should engage in sexual activity, (that monk) is defeated and excommunicated.

Sutta Number: AN2.16
Pali: atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tena upasaṅkami. upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi
English Translation: After that, a certain brahmin approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he exchanged pleasantries with the Blessed One.

Sutta Number: DHP87 (simpl)
Pali: kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ vippahāya, sukkaṃ bhāve paṇḍito, okā anokaṃ āgamma, viveke yattha dūramaṃ.
English Translation: A wise person, completely abandoning dark qualities, would cultivate pure [qualities], coming from home to homelessness, [living] in seclusion, where [it is] difficult to find delight.

Sutta Number: MN27 (simpl)
Pali: yan’nūn’āhaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajeyyāmi
English Translation: Having shaved hair and beard, and having clothed myself in brown robes, let me go forth from the household life to homelessness. [What if I shave hair and beard, clothe myself in brown robes and go forth…?]

Sutta Number: MN118
Pali: idha bhikkhu pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā, ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya, parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā.
English Translation: Here, a monk, having folded [his legs] in the cross-legged sitting position, directing [his] body [to sit] erectly, he establishes mindfulness as first priority.

Sutta Number: SN22.59
Pali: ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati isipatane migadāye. tatra kho bhagavā pañcavaggiye bhikkhū āmantesi
English Translation: On one occasion, the Blessed One was dwelling in Varanasi, in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There, the Blessed One addressed the monks belonging to the group of five.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 5
Pali: yo pana bhikkhu sañcarittaṃ samāpajjeyya itthiyā vā purisamatiṃ purisassa vā itthimatiṃ
English Translation: If any monk should engage in carrying proposals of man’s intention to a woman or woman’s intention to a man…

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA 11 (simpl)
Pali: dhammavādī ca eso bhikkhu vinayavādī ca eso bhikkhu amhākaṃ ca eso bhikkhu chandaṃ ca ruciṃ ca ādāya voharati
English Translation: This monk who speaks according to the Dhamma, and this monk who speaks according to the Vinaya, speaks according to (i.e. in accordance with) our preference and approval…

Sutta Number: VIN PAT SA
Pali: ciṇṇamānatto bhikkhu yattha siyā vīsatigaṇo bhikkhusaṅgho tattha so bhikkhu abbhetabbo.
English Translation: A monk who has performed penance, where there could be a community of twenty monks, in that place he should be rehabilitated.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT PC 42
Pali: ekakassa me kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hotī”ti, etaṃ eva paccayaṃ karitvā anaññaṃ, pācittiyaṃ.
English Translation: “There is ease for me talking or sitting down by myself;” having made this just for that reason, [and] no other, [this is] an offence requiring confession.

Sutta Number: MN107
Pali: rattiyā majjhimaṃ yāmaṃ dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappeyyāsi pāde pādaṃ accādhāya sato sampajāno uṭṭhānasaññaṃ manasikaritvā
English Translation: In the middle watch of the night, you should make the lion’s pose, [lying] on the right flank, placing [one] foot on the [other] foot, mindful, fully knowing, having noted in the mind the wake-up time.

Sutta Number: MN62 (simpl)
Pali: atha kho āyasmā rāhulo, ajja bhagavatā sammukhā ovādena ovadito gāmaṃ piṇḍāya pavisitvā, tato paṭinivattitvā aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle nisīditvā
English Translation: And then, after entering the village for alms food [and] coming back from that, [and] having sat down at the foot of a certain tree, Venerable Rāhula now face-to-face with the Blessed One, was instructed by exhortation.

Sutta Number: SN1.39
Pali: atha kho pajjunnassa dhītā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ mahāvanaṃ obhāsetvā
English Translation: And then, when the night had progressed, the daughter of the god of rain, stunningly beautiful, having illuminated almost the entire great wood [approached the Blessed One].

Sutta Number: MN43
Pali: dve kho, āvuso, paccayā animittāya cetovimuttiyā samāpattiyā, sabbanimittānaṃ ca amanasikāro, animittāya ca dhātuyā manasikāro.
English Translation: Friend, [there are] indeed two supporting conditions for the attainment of the signless liberation of mind: non-attention to all objects and attention to the signless state.

Sutta Number: SN15.1
Pali: ayaṃ me mātā, tassā me mātu ayaṃ mātā iti, apariyādinnā va bhikkhave, tassa purisassa mātumātaro assu.
English Translation: “This [is] my mother, this [is] the mother of my mother”; [the sequence] of that man’s mothers’ mothers would not even be exhausted.

Sutta Number: VIN1.3.1
Pali: mātugāmo nāma manuss'itthī, na yakkhī na petī na tiracchānagatā. antamaso tad'ahujātā api dārikā, pag'eva mahattarī.
English Translation: [What] is called a woman [is] a human female, neither female demon nor female ghost nor female animal, even a girl born that very day, to say nothing of [one] older.

Sutta Number: AN5.207
Pali: khuddaṃ paṭihanati, pipāsaṃ paṭivineti, vātaṃ anulometi, vatthiṃ sodheti, ām'āvasesaṃ pāceti. ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā yāguyā.
English Translation: It wards off hunger, dispels thirst, settles wind, purifies the bladder, [and] digests remnants of undigested food. Indeed, monks, these are the five benefits of rice porridge.


Class 8 Extra

Sutta Number: DHP88
Pali: tatra abhiratiṃ iccheyya, hitvā kāme akiñcano, pariyodapeyya attānaṃ, cittaklesehi paṇḍito.
English Translation: A wise person, possession-less, would wish for pleasure in that place, having abandoned sensual pleasures, he would purify himself from mental defilements.

Sutta Number: DN22.18
Pali: uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati
English Translation: He strives, applies [his] mind, arouses effort, exerts himself, [and] generates approval for the non-confusion, increase by development, persistence, maturity, and completion of wholesome qualities that have arisen.

Sutta Number: VIN PAT NP 3 (simpl)
Pali: no ce assa pāripūri, māsaparamaṃ so bhikkhu taṃ cīvaraṃ nikkhipeyya, ce assa ūnassa pāripūriyā paccāsā.
English Translation: If it [i.e. the robe-cloth] should not be [enough] for completion, that monk should set [it] aside for a month at the most if there should be the expectation for the completion of the deficiency…

Sutta Number: SNP56
Pali: yattha nāmaṃ ca rūpaṃ ca asesaṃ uparujjhati, viññāṇassa nirodhena, ettha etaṃ uparujjhati.
English Translation: Wherever name and form is completely ended, here this thing is ended by means of the cessation of consciousness.

Sutta Number: SNP16
Pali: etādisāni katvāna, sabbattha aparājitā, sabbattha sotthiṃ gacchanti
English Translation: Having done [things] of this kind, victorious everywhere, they go everywhere safely.

Sutta Number: SN55.23
Pali: idha, bhante, koci'd'eva dhammo samuppādo uppajjeyya, ekato assa bhagavā ekato bhikkhusaṅgho ca.
English Translation: Here, venerable sir, some or other issue [concerning] the teaching could arise, the Blessed One might be on one side and the community of monks on one [i.e. the other] side.

Sutta Number: DHP284
Pali: yāva hi vanatho na chijjati, aṇumatto api narassa nārīsu, paṭibaddhamano eva tāva so, vaccho khīrapako va mātari.
English Translation: Indeed, as long as desire is not cut off, even the smallest, of a man enamoured with regard to women, just to that extent he [is] like a suckling calf towards [its] mother.