Topic: Class 2 Exercises

Pali: namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā-sambuddhassa
English Translation: Homage to him, the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the fully Enlightened One.

Pali: avijjāya tv'eva asesa-virāga-nirodhā saṅkhāra-nirodho, saṅkhāra-nirodhā viññāṇa-nirodho, viññāṇa-nirodhā nāmarūpa-nirodho, nāmarūpa-nirodhā saḷāyatana-nirodho, saḷāyatana-nirodhā phassa-nirodho, phassa-nirodhā vedanā-nirodho, vedanā-nirodhā taṇhā-nirodho, taṇhā-nirodhā upādāna-nirodho, upādāna-nirodhā bhava-nirodho, bhava-nirodhā jāti-nirodho, jāti-nirodhā jarā-maraṇaṃ soka-parideva-dukkha-domanass'upāyāsā nirujjhanti.
English Translation: But from the complete fading away and cessation of ignorance there is cessation of volitional formations; from the cessation of volitional formations, cessation of consciousness; from the cessation of consciousness, cessation of name-and-form; from the cessation of name-and-form, cessation of the six sense bases; from the cessation of the six sense bases, cessation of contact; from the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; from the cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; from the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; from the cessation of clinging, cessation of existence; from the cessation of existence, cessation of birth; from the cessation of birth, aging-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair cease.

Source Reference: SN 10.8
Pali: buddho kira loke uppanno
English Translation: A Buddha has indeed arisen in the world.
 
Source Reference: TH 257 simpl
Pali: araññe rukkhānaṃ mūlesu, kandarāsu guhāsu ca
English Translation: At the foot of a tree in a forest, in valleys, and in caves.

Source Reference: DN 22.1 simpl
Pali: maggo hoti sokaparidevānaṃ samatikkamāya, ñāyassa adhigamāya, nibbānassa sacchikiriyāya.
English Translation: It is the path for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the attainment of the (right) method, for personal experience of total emancipation.

Source Reference: AN 10.48
Pali: uttarissa manussassa dhammo alam’ariyo ñāṇadassanassa viseso
English Translation: the state of a superior human being, the attainment of knowing and seeing, suitable for a noble person,

Source Reference: DN 22.5
Pali: atthi imasmiṃ kāye kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco
English Translation: There are in this body, hair [on the head], hairs of the body, nails, teeth, skin.

Source Reference: VIN PAT SE 55 simpl
Pali: na sāmisena hatthena pānīyassa thālakaṃ paṭiggahessāmi iti sikkhā karaṇīyā
English Translation: I will not take a cup for drinking water with a soiled hand.

Source Reference: VIN PAT NID nidānuddeso
Pali: saṅgho uposathaṃ kareyya, pātimokkhaṃ uddiseyya
English Translation: The community of monks could make an observance day [and] would recite the training rules.

Pali: itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti
English Translation: It is so (thus) “He [is] the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the fully Enlightened One, endowed with wisdom and ethical conduct, Fortunate One, knower of the world, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, the Awakened One, the Blessed One.”

Source Reference: VIN 1.1.3
Pali: 1. kāyassa bhedā
English Translation: From the break-up of the body

Source Reference: AN 10.29 
Pali: 2. samaṇo gotamo
English Translation: The recluse Gotama

Source Reference: SN 22.57
Pali: 3. virāgāya nirodhāya 
English Translation: for dispassion, for cessation

Source Reference: TH 251
Pali: 4. bālassa mohāya
English Translation: for the delusion of the fool

Source Reference: TH 251
Pali: 5. kāmehi lokamhi
English Translation: [there is no satisfaction] by sensual pleasures in the world

Pali: 6. devā manussā
English Translation: gods and humans

Source Reference: SN 56.11
Pali: 7. cāgo paṭinissaggo anālayo 
English Translation: The relinquishing, the abandonment, the non-attachment

Source Reference: MN 107
Pali: 8. pāde pādaṃ
English Translation: [he places] a foot on a foot

Source Reference: DN 22.18
Pali: 9. dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ
English Translation: [he arouses] desire for the arising of states of mind

Source Reference: VIBH 6.1
Pali: 10. khandhānaṃ bhedo 
English Translation: the break-up of the aggregates

Source Reference: % AN 8.53
Pali: 11. dhammā virāgāya
English Translation: [these] things/qualities [lead] to dispassion

Source Reference: AN 8.79
Pali: 12. dhammā sekhassa
English Translation: qualities of a trainee

Source Reference: SN 56.11
Pali: 13. samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā
English Translation: with either a recluse or a brahmin or a deity or Mara

Source Reference: % SN 22.59
Pali: 14. saṅkhārā ābādhāya
English Translation: Volitional formations [are conducive for] disease

Source Reference: SN 35.28
Pali: 15. sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi
English Translation: (burning) with griefs, lamentations, sufferings, distresses, afflictions

Pali: 16. dhammo vinayo 
English Translation: The Doctrine-Discipline

Source Reference: SN 12.41
Pali: 17. vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ
English Translation: [reborn] in a state of suffering, in hell.

Pali: 18. aparena samayena buddho
English Translation: on another occasion, the Awakened One…

Source Reference: VIN 1.4.1.2
Pali: 19. gabbhe cīvaraṃ
English Translation: the robe in the room

Source Reference: VIN 1.1.4
Pali: 20. āvāse vassaṃ
English Translation: (entered) the rainy season at the dwelling place.

Source Reference: MN 99
Pali: 21. nīvaraṇehi brāhmaṇo
English Translation: The brahmin [filled] with the [five] hindrances

Pali: 22. kāme brāhmaṇa
English Translation: O, brahmin! … sensual pleasures

Source Reference: DHP 331
Pali: 23. atthamhi sahāyā
English Translation: [Good are] friends in [arisen] need 
English Translation: [Good are] friends when need [arises]

Source Reference: MN 35
Pali: 24. gotamo sāvake … gotamassa sāvakesu
English Translation: Gotama [trains] disciples…. Gotama’s [instruction presented] to disciples

Source Reference: SN 19.21
Pali: 25. kassapassa vinayasmiṃ 
English Translation: in the discipline of the Kassapa

Source Reference: $ AN 8.19
Pali: 26. saṅghamhā saṅgho 
English Translation: [far] from the Saṅgha [and] the Saṅgha [is far from]